.TH FMA 1
.SH NAME
fma \- fast manual access
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fma
.RI [ section ] " manualpage"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B fma
command.
.PP
\fBfma\fP is a script which allows fast and efficient access to manual pages
through using compression via lzop and display of vim.

fma generates manpages via running 'man <requested_manpage>' and storing
the result in a file with the extension txt in directory $HOME/man. Then
lzop is executed for the file and the output is written to a file with the
additional extension lzo. Afterwards the editor vim is executed with
filetype set to man and using on-the-fly decompressing using lzop again.

So far you did not win any time of course. But if you want to display the
same manpage again the processed manpage already exists in $HOME/man and
can be displayed immediately. If you want to experience the difference
just run 'fma zshall' two times and compare it with 'man zshall' too.
.SH OPTIONS
fma supports the following options:
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.TP
.B $MANDIR
If the environment variable MANDIR is set the specified directory is taken
for output files instead of the default directory $HOME/man.
.SH USAGE EXAMPLE
.TP
.B % fma zshall
Display manpage zshall (man zshall).
.TP
.B % fma 1 read
Display manpage read of section 1 (man 1 read).
.TP
.B % fma 2 read
Display manpage read of section 2 (man 2 read).
.SH AUTHOR
fma was written by Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org> based on an idea of
Matthias Kopfermann <matthi@grml.org>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org>
for the grml project (but may be used by others).
