.\" Filename:      grml-scripts.1
.\" Purpose:       man page for grml-scripts
.\" Authors:       grml-team (grml.org), (c) Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org>
.\" Bug-Reports:   see http://grml.org/bugs/
.\" License:       This file is licensed under the GPL v2.
.\" Latest change: Die Sep 26 12:37:06 CEST 2006 [mika]
.\"###############################################################################

.\"###############################################################
.TH grml\-scripts 1 "grml-scripts"
.SH "NAME"
grml\-scripts \- script collection for the grml distribution
.\"#######################################################
.SH "USER SCRIPTS"

.SS align
find out a platform's endianness, alignment rules, and type
sizes. Moderately useful for porting stuff.
.SS attach-screen
attach to a running screen-session
.SS bincompare.pl
binary file similarity checking (using entropy)
.SS caps-ctrl
Switch keyboard settings of key known as "Caps-Lock" between
using Caps-Lock either as control- or shift-key. Notice:
running caps-ctrl on console requires root-permissions,
running it in X window system works as normal user.
.SS cicqhist
create a human-readable version of centericq history
.SS code2color
convert a source code to syntax highlighted HTML
.SS code2html
convert code to html
.SS cpu-screen
output current / available cpu frequence (useful for integration into GNU screen)
.SS cpufreq-detect.sh
detect cpu type and set $MODULE to appropriate kernel module for cpufrequency scaling
.SS dir2html
create HTML-listing for a directory
.SS exifinfo
print EXIF information of an image file
.SS fex
extract archives via smart frontend
.SS find-hidden-word-text
find hidden text in MS Word documents
.SS find-text
search for text pattern in text file only
.SS findwaste
find good directories for archiving based on the average age
of files (access time) in the directory and the directory size
.SS firevim
open a file from firefox with vim
.SS get_tw_cli
get 3ware RAID controller command line interface tool (tw_cli)
.SS grepc
grep for pattern and cut it
.SS grml-bind
make a readonly-file writeable (not necessary when using
unionfs)
.SS grml-config-user
Configuration interface for user tasks on the grml system.
.SS grml-hwinfo
collect hardware information and write it to info.tar.bz2
.SS grml-info
start browser with documentation for grml
.SS grml-init
fix tty permissions and run screen and zsh (notice: not required for
interactive usage but only for startup of grml system)
.SS grml-lock
lock virtual consoles
.SS grml-mutt
configuration script for mailclient mutt
.SS grml-muttng
configuration script for mailclient mutt-ng
.SS grml-resolution
change X resolution via a simple menu frontend
.SS grml-screen
start screen session and fix console permissions
.SS grml-lang
switch keyboard layout
.SS grml-slrn
configuration script for newsreader slrn
.SS grml-start
start browser with information page on grml
.SS hgrep.sh
highlight grep output
.SS iimage
create statical webgallery
.SS ip-screen
print ip address of configured network interfaces to stdout.
.SS irclog2html-2.1.pl
create html output of irc log files
.SS lesspipe.sh
wrapper for less
.SS logview
Log viewer program. Pass it parameters of the logs to view, or it will automatically view some.
.SS mailhops
shows the route of an Internet mail message
.SS make_chroot_jail
create chroot environment for a user
.SS myip
return IP address of running system on stdout (requires network access)
.SS osd_server.py
Listen for incoming messages on a specific port and print
them via osd_cat.
.SS runit
prompt for command via Xdialog and execute it afterwards
.SS say
wrapper for festival to use the text to speech system
.SS search
perl script by Jeffrey Friedl - a combo of find and grep
.SS sepdate.pl sepdate.rb sepdate.sh
"endless september"
.SS soundtest
Test sound on your grml system via playing a ogg-file.
Provide the files you want to play as arguments,
adjust player which should be used for playing the files
via environment variable PLAYER. Calling the script without
any arguments will play the default file via ogg123.
.SS sysdump
dump /sys to a textformat
.SS tinyp2p.py
a functional peer-to-peer file sharing application, written in
fifteen lines of code, in the Python programming language
.SS twebgal
create a tiny webgallery using CSS-features
.SS unbleach.pl
replace all the unsighted unprintable characters
bleached out of your source, useful for really
dirty perl programs
.SS urlgrep.awk
print http|ftp|rstp|mms:// text entries in text.
.SS usbtree
Reads /proc/bus/usb/devices and selectively lists and/or interprets it.
.SS wwwis
read in an HTML file and insert 'HEIGHT=### WIDTH=###' directives into the inlined images used in the file
.SS XF86AudioLowerVolume
Lower audio volume.
.SS XF86AudioMute
Mute and - if run again - restore audio settings.
.SS XF86AudioRaiseVolume
Raise audio volume.
.SS xsay
output X clipboard text via flite (soundsystem)
.SS zsh-login
Start zsh using login-option through exec.

.SH "ADMIN SCRIPTS"

.SS blacklist
Blacklist module via module-init-tools (/etc/modprobe.d/grml).
.SS bt-audio
Connect audio bluetooth device (e.g. bluetooth headset) to local system.
.SS bt-hid
Connect human input device via bluetooth to local system.
.SS dpkg_not_running
Check whether Debian's package management (dpkg) is running.
Returns 0 if it is not running and 1 if it is already running.
.SS dpkg-rebuild
rebuild your Debian dpkg/apt status file if it got
corrupted by a system crash.
.SS grml-config
Central configuration interface to configure the grml system.
.SS grml-config-root
Configuration interface for admin tasks on the grml system.
.SS grml-hostname
Simple frontend to set hostname.
.SS grml-nessus
Prepare nessus for use on grml system.
.SS grml-postfix
Configuration script to set up postfix on grml system for
use with TLS.
.SS grml-tpm
Set up a system for use with TPM technology.
.SS grml-vpnc-tugraz
Connect to TU Graz network via vpnc.
.SS mkdosswapfile
Create GRML swapfile on an existing DOS partition.
.SS ndiswrapper.sh
NdisWrapper configuration script.
.SS noeject
Wrapper script to avoid ejecting and prompting for CD removal when
rebooting/halting system. Use it via 'noeject <cmd>', e.g. 'noeject reboot'
to reboot system without ejecting CD and without prompting.
.SS noprompt
Wrapper script to avoid prompting for CD removal when rebooting/halting
system. Use it via 'noprompt <cmd>', e.g. 'noprompt reboot' to reboot system
without prompting.
.SS pong
Ping a class-C subnet in parallel without using a broadcast
address. Useful for seeing which IPs are in use.
.SS prepare_ramdisk.sh
Set up a ramdisk.
.SS prepare_tmpfs.sh
Set up a tmpfs.
.SS PrintAnalyzer
Generate some stats from cups page_log file.
.SS service
Wrapper script for /etc/init.d/-scripts. Use it e.g. via 'service postfix start'.
.SS suspenduser.sh
Suspend a user account for the indefinite future.
.SS unblacklist
Remove blacklisted module from /etc/modprobe.d/grml.

.SH "BUGS"
Probably. Please report any bugs you find and report
feedback and suggestions to the grml-team.
See http://grml.org/bugs/ for further information.
Thank you!

.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \(co 2004-2006 by the grml-team.
.\"###### END OF FILE ##########################################################
.\" vim:tw=60
