.TH FMA 1
.SH NAME
qma \- quick manual access
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qma
.RI "[ section ] manualpage [ keyword ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B qma
command.
.PP
\fBqma\fP is a script which allows quick and efficient access to manual pages
through using compression via lzop and display of vim.

qma generates manpages via running 'man <requested_manpage>' and storing
the result in a file with the extension txt in directory $HOME/man. Then
lzop is executed for the file and the output is written to a file with the
additional extension lzo. Afterwards the editor vim is executed with
filetype set to man and using on-the-fly decompressing using lzop again.

So far you did not win any time of course. But if you want to display the
same manpage again the processed manpage already exists in $HOME/man and
can be displayed immediately. If you want to experience the difference
just run 'qma zshall' two times and compare it with 'man zshall' too.

If you want to jump to a special keyword inside the manpage use it as
last option of the qma commandline. Searching for the keyword is done
case insensitive inside vim.
.SH OPTIONS
qma supports the following options:
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.TP
.B $MANDIR
If the environment variable MANDIR is set the specified directory is taken
for output files instead of the default directory $HOME/man.
.SH USAGE EXAMPLE
.TP
.B % qma zshall
Display manpage zshall (man zshall).
.TP
.B % qma 1 read
Display manpage read of section 1 (man 1 read).
.TP
.B % qma 2 read
Display manpage read of section 2 (man 2 read).
.TP
.B % qma grml overview
Display manpage grml and jump to keyword "overview".
.SH AUTHOR
qma was written by Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org> based on an idea of
Matthias Kopfermann <matthi@grml.org>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org>
for the grml project (but may be used by others).
